Adds combined TLS documentation and example (#2090)
skupperproject/skupper: doc/tls/README.md

# TLS

Skupper uses TLS certificates to authenticate and secure communications between
skupper routers in a network through channels called Links. The Skupper

> controller for Kubernetes will by default take care of issuing the TLS
> credentials used by Links. This document elaborates on the requirements for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
controller for Kubernetes will, by default, take care of issuing the self signed TLS
credentials used by Links. This document elaborates on the requirements for
```

# TLS

Skupper uses TLS certificates to authenticate and secure communications between
skupper routers in a network through channels called Links. The Skupper
controller for Kubernetes will, by default, take care of issuing the self
signed TLS credentials used by Links. This document describes the requirements
for these TLS credentials, the default scheme used by the Skupper Kubernetes
controller, and how other certificate infrastructure could be included.

## TLS Credentials Requirements

> Skupper uses mutual TLS (mTLS) to establish Links between Sites. Each side of
> these connections, the Link and the RouterAccess that it connects to, must
> present a valid certificate and validate the peer's certificate using a trusted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Skupper uses mutual TLS (mTLS) to establish Links between Sites. The Site that initiates the Link acts at the TLS client to the RouterAccess, which acts as the TLS server, The server side must present a valid server certificate and the client side must present its client certificate and both side validate each other's certificate (mTLS)  using a trusted CA```

CA. Any intermediate load balancers between Sites should use TLS passthrough
(i.e. should not terminate TLS.) Terminating TLS will prevent the routers on
either site from authenticating one another.

> ### Link TLS Credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Link TLS Credentials (TLS client)
```

A Link has its own set of TLS Credentials that includes a certificate and a
database of trusted Certificate Authorities (CAs) that it will use to
authenticate the server's certificate. The Link certificate has few specific
requirements. It must be valid and signed by a CA the peer RouterAccess trusts,
and it should have appropriate key usage attributes for client authentication.

> ### RouterAccess TLS Credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### RouterAccess TLS Credentials (TLS Server)
```

- The Skupper controller issues a new client TLS certificate signed by the
  accepting Site's `skupper-site-ca` CA, and embeds the CA public key into the
  `ca.crt` field of the client certificate.
- The new client certificate is transported to the linking Site, either
  manually by the user or over https through the AccessToken redemption
  endpoint. It is saved as a Secret, often with a random name based on the
  accepting site name.
- This Secret is then referenced in the Link’s spec.tlsCredentials field.
- The linking Site's routers are configured, and secure connections to
  accepting Site routers using these new credentials are made.

## Manual TLS Certificate Management

Understanding the requirements for TLS Credentials for connecting Sites and the
default behaviour of the Skupper controller for Kubernetes, it is possible to
exercise finer control over the certificates issued.

### Using user-provided CAs

As a rule, if a secret that the Skupper controller requires already exists, or
that secret is overwritten by a user, Skupper will stop trying to manage that
secret. This means that it is possible to provide any of the credentials

> manually. One pattern that can be useful is to provide Sites with an alternate
> CA in `skupper-site-ca`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manually. One pattern that can be useful is to provide Sites with your own custom 
CA in `skupper-site-ca`.
```

Reviewer: > 

Please ignore this comment ! Apologies

### Manually Managing Link and RouterAccess tlsCredentials

Full manual control of TLS certificates can be accomplished by manually
managing RouterAccess and Links.

This example sets up the following:
* A toy PKI using the `openssl` tool (written using `OpenSSL 3.2.4`)

> * A single network-scoped CA for simplicity - contrasts with the default site-scoped CA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A single network-scoped self-signed CA for simplicity - contrasts with the default site-scoped CA.
```

  LoadBalancer Service for ingress, and one "private" Site without ingress.

#### Issue a network CA

Use the openssl configuration file in this directory to set up a self-signed CA.
```
openssl req -x509 -new \
        -config network-ca.conf -newkey rsa \
        -out ca.crt -keyout ca.key
```

This should produce two files `ca.crt` and `ca.key`.

#### Set up the Skupper Sites

Using the kube context for the public site: `kubectl apply -f public.yaml`

This manifest has a Site and RouterAccess configured for the public site. The
RouterAccess points to `tlsCredentials: public-server-tls`. This will be the
name of the Secret Skupper will use.

Using the kube context for the private site: `kubectl apply -f private.yaml`

#### Manually Issuing Certificates

In order to issue a TLS certificate for the public site, we first need the
address(es) that the RouterAccess will listen on. This is required for peers to
validate the host.

Get the RouterAccess Status using the kube context for the public site:
```
kubectl get routeraccesses.skupper.io skupper \
    -ojsonpath='{range .status.endpoints[*]}{.host}{"\n"}{end}'
```

> Assuming that a LoadBalancer service was created, there should be a document

Author: That's just me mixing terminology - document / block of yaml / status.endpoints field (ref: https://skupperproject.github.io/refdog/resources/router-access.html)

I'll think on giving this another pass.

with endpoints. This will be important later, but for now we only need the
hosts. In this example there was one unique address `172.18.255.193`.

Now we can issue a key pair for the public site and put it in the `public-server-tls` Secret.

> > ⚠️ Do not forget: substitute in your RouterAccess host in for COMMON_NAME

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ Do not forget:  replace  COMMON_NAME with your RouterAccess host.
```

private site should have TLS credentials that will allow it to authenticate.
The private site needs a Link resource to complete the connection.

The Link document needs to be populated with `tlsCredentials: public-link-tls`
to match the name of the secret in the private site to use. It also requires a
`endpoints` block, identical to the one in the public site's RouterAccess
status section. The skupper CLI can generate this document for you, using the
public kube context.

```
skupper link generate \
    --tls-credentials public-link-tls \
    --generate-credential=false | tee link.yaml
```

This will output a Link record document with the endpoints filled to connect to
the public site.

Using the kube context for the private site: `kubectl apply -f link.yaml`

This will apply the link to the private site. The sites should connect.

## TLS Credential Rotation

**TODO** Support for rotating TLS Credentials is currently under development
and is not yet fully implemented.

When considering rotating the TLS credentials used by Skupper, it is important
to understand the trust model used for linking Skupper Sites. The default

> [trust model](#controller-managed-tls-in-kubernetes) used by Skupper is

Reviewer 2: link to be updated if you accept change earlier in doc

distributed: each Site having its own trust root. Because of this, rotating

> client certificates and Site CAs is an especially complicated exercise.

Reviewer 2: As a workaround, can I just recreate links and all connectors/listeners will 'just work'?

# TLS

Skupper uses TLS certificates to authenticate and secure communications between
Skupper routers in a network through channels called Links. The Skupper
controller for Kubernetes will, by default, take care of issuing the self
signed TLS credentials used by Links. This document describes the requirements
for these TLS credentials, the default scheme used by the Skupper Kubernetes
controller, and how other certificate infrastructure could be included.

## TLS Credentials Requirements

Skupper uses mutual TLS (mTLS) to establish Links between Sites. The Site that
initiates the Link acts at the TLS client to the RouterAccess, which acts as
the TLS server, The server side must present a valid server certificate and the
client side must present its client certificate and both side validate each

> other's certificate (mTLS)  using a trusted CA``` CA. Any intermediate load

Reviewer 3: > CA```` CA

typo?

Author: Oh boy! I've jumbled this paragraph accepting/merging review suggestions. Will take another look at this one!
